The Joe Rogan experience.
The hormone augmentation thing is always a little bit of a complicated
discussion. Mm-hmm <affirmative>,
but there's so much that's happening there right now. That's really interesting.
Like what? Well, for instance, um, sort of back to the topic of supplements,
I always say, look there behaviors are the fundamental layer.
You have to do the right things for anything, for sleep, for learning, uh,
sports performance, but then there's nutrition, supplementation,
prescription drugs, and then off label stuff. Right. Mm-hmm <affirmative>.
And so we always think about when you hear hormones in sports,
you always think just the raw conversation about anabolics all the band stuff.
We could talk about that stuff and how it works years ago,
I used to work on androgens just AONE and it's derivatives and how it impacts
brain develop and body function, fear, and, and also mental states.
But there's a category of supplements that are very interesting,
that for most people who aren't exploring testosterone augmentation for sport
work very well to increase testosterone by about a hundred to 200 points,
not, you know, 300, you know, not a tripling or anything like that.
And the main ones are two substances. One is called tongue, got Ali. Oh yeah.
Which is that? Stuff's real, huh? Yeah. Oh yeah, because the,
what happens is the testosterone molecule,
it it's basically carried in a cargo, so it can be in its free form,
Unbound form, free testosterone. And everyone says, oh,
I want more free testosterone. You want more? But the,
these what are called sex hormone binding globulin.
So there's something called sex, hormone, bonding, globulin, and albumin.
They carry the testosterone molecule to the different tissues of the body.
So you don't want all your testosterone free.
You want some of it bound up so that it can be delivered to the different
tissues, including your brain. But if you have too much sex, hormone bonding,
globulin, the testosterone can't really do its things. Oh,
so Toga Ali about 400 milligrams per day has the effect of raising
free testosterone and overall testosterone by about a hundred to 200 points.
And so we're not talking about full T RT or blasting,
or now that I I'm always amused on YouTube, they now call it sports T RT.
That's when you get above 200 milligrams per week sports, this basically,
you know, you've got T RT, which is typically about 200 milligrams per week.
And when you say 200 milligrams, when you're looking at a syringe, what is that?
So thatty, is that a thousand milligrams?
So the typical dose of, of, uh, testosterone replacement therapy,
mm-hmm <affirmative> is 200 milligrams given once every week to two weeks. But.
When you look at a full syringe, what is that? So.
For one CC, one mill, right? That's 200 milligrams typically of C eight,
which is sold in.
One CC, a full CC is.
Only two that's one. CC is not gonna be that much. It's a, yeah.
So it depends if you have a little narrow syringe.
Okay. Right, right. But if you have a syringe that goes up to 10, what is.
That's? That's 10 CCS. That's a lot, lot. That's 10 CCS. Yeah.
That's a thousand oh milligrams. That.
Makes sense. Right. So it would be two on that. And.
That's 200 milligrams. That's right. So, well, as long as we're going, you.
Were saying like two.
Full syringes. Yeah. I mean,
I actually think that a lot of people who think they need T RT,
when I hear about guys in their twenties and thirties, it,
it look I'm in my mid forties. And I,
I can tell you that you can get and maintain very healthy testosterone levels
without TT. If you do the right things, the behaviors, the nutrition,
all the other stuff early on there's,
sometimes people are of hypogonadal syndromes and things like.
That. There's a lot of issues with guys that head injuries.
And with head injuries and AB absolutely. And we, it be a,
an interesting conversation to talk about the role of testosterone in,
in neural repair. It's very interesting.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> but when you look at T RT, I mean,
the way that the clinics and the doctors typically do it is to give 200
milligrams and then send people out for two weeks and then they come back cuz
they can charge them to come back repeatedly. It's clear that on a,
without any T RT testes normally make anywhere from seven to 15 milligrams of
testosterone per day.
So taking this massive dose and then waiting two weeks is absolutely foolish.
It doesn't, uh, it's amazing to me that the,
the medical profession does this because it doesn't match anything about the
normal patterns of endocrinology. It's just not how the body works.
The way it's been described to me to do it is to do it, um,
with an insulin syringe and to do a tiny amount every three days. Right.
That's correct. Yeah. So 0.2 milli, you know, 0.2 mill. So maybe, you know,
it's 20 to 60 milligrams every, every few days, every third day or so, right.
That much more closely matches the normal pattern of release and avoids
these estrogen crash is. And a lot of problems that are,
that are layered onto estrogen are actually problems with prolactin,
which is a molecule that's involved in milk Glu down and lactating women.
But it actually shuts down the sexual desire and aggression. You know,
when, uh, this is interesting about prolactin. So, um,
this happens in brooding birds and it happens in humans. They've done this,
a study, he published in the journal nature,
which is our kind of apex journal showed that when the husbands of pregnant
women, because of something, maybe a PHMO,
maybe some odor of the pregnant woman actually increases the man's prolactin.
When they're pregnant, puts body weight on the guy starts laying down body fat,
presumably to prepare the father for a long sleepless nights ahead because
humans have always co-parented wow.
Am I mostly co-parented we all we know women do far more.
But it's true dudes out there who get fat, don't feel bad.
Yeah's going on. The dad bought is, is in part due to an increase in prolactin.
Oh, and testosterone and prolactin. You're kind of working in opposite fashion.
So it's a very thing. But, uh,
the way you describe it is correct now for people that aren't getting prescribed
T R T, but want the increase in testosterone.
There are these plant compounds like Toga Ali and another one,
which is very interesting. It's a Nigerian shrub called Fido GREs.
And it mimics Lutin hormone,
which is the hormone that comes outta the hypothalamus that stimulates thet.
If you got those in your ovaries,
if you've got those to make more testosterone or estrogen.
And so those two herbal supplements together can give a significant boost
in free and active testosterone.
So you said, tongue, God, Ali can give you 100, 200. Yeah. About.
That.
What does the other one give you fed?
Doja has usually taken it about 600 milligrams. Um, and that can I,
the,
the most dramatic effect I've ever seen was somebody who had his testosterone
down in the low twos, or I think it was like low twos and it,
he got it up to the 700 range, which, but that's, but that's an outlier, right?
Most people are gonna see about a three, three to 400 point.
Increase. And that's what the two of them Sy.
Synergistically Theia will actually make the testees grow. It's a, it's,
it's a noticeable difference. So everybody wants that. <laugh> well,
the reason I know about this stuff, people are probably thinking like, you know,
Huberman running gear out the back of his Gar,
and that's not what this is about is that I,
I do a certain amount of work with military and I do a certain wanna work with
professional athletes who cannot take androgen compounds out of a syringe
because they'll lose their job. Right.
Or they've been doing that and they want to come off, although,
and I'm not gonna out the organization,
but there is one major professional sports organization where let's just say,
if somebody gets injured,
they have permission to take up to 200 milligram a week of testosterone soccer.
No, no. No, but good guess <laugh> you almost got me there.
<laugh> cause I almost countered with the actual thing they did is hockey. Uh,
no, although those guys have the, the head head injuries. So actually,
so that right, the head injury thing is, is, is a serious problem, obviously.
So testosterone has the, the effects.
We're all aware of like deepening the voice, facial hair,
muscle growth recovery, et cetera,
mostly because testosterone increases protein synthesis.
You look at a young male in puberty, it's a protein synthesis machine. Yeah.
They eat the a,
and they just grow and grow and grow and they're putting on muscles and they're
lean. And you know, so most often they're lean, but in any case,
testosterone has some very interesting effects on the brain. The,
the major mental effect of testosterone is it makes effort feel good.
Oh, that makes.
Sense. And the reason it does it is that the Amy amygdala,
this fear center in the brain,
this anxiety center in the brain has androgen receptors.
It has testosterone receptors. So it,
the way this works in animals and in humans as well, is that for most species,
the males of that species never get a chance to mate. Right.
So if you think about, uh, I'll probably pick an example. Well,
you'll you'll know the exception, cuz I know, you know,
a lot about natural animals and animals that are hunted.
But if you think about animals with antlers like Rams,
there's been a lot of research. Believe it or not on AMS, it'd be fun.
I'd love to work on Rams. Do you know.
Rams have enormous.
Balls and they have to fight for the right to make. Yes.
And the fighting is a choice, right? And the decision to walk away is a choice.
Usually they usually don't kill each other.
Although I know some of the injuries can lead to death. So testosterone,
these surges and testosterone that happen seasonally in certain species like
Rams or even these little hamsters,
the males will rip each other's testicles off in order to fight for the right to
mate.
So males of a given species have to actually overcome the fear of pain and
punishment.
And the surgeon testosterone is what causes the shift to the
willingness to engage in battle. Mm. And so when humans are taking low doses or,
or reasonable doses of testosterone or they're increasing their testosterone or
they're going through puberty effort and leaning into pain and challenge
actually has the effect of making the body feel soothed and good.
It's a drive just like sex is a drive or drinking water.
When you're thirsty is a drive.
This stuff is all anchored deep within the hypothalamus.
This isn't a cognitive thing.
That makes sense why young men in particular are really driven to
hard exercise and sports that are ver very difficult.
That require extreme effort completely makes sense.
Yeah. And why, when people are testosterone depleted, they feel depressed.
And when people have a surge of testosterone,
they feel relief and anxiety provided it's in the appropriate range.
Catch new episodes that Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify,
watch back catalog J R E videos on Spotify,
including clip easily seamlessly switch between video
and audio experience on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can
download episodes to save on data cost. All for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new area episodes.
You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.